this is David Dunning you probably don't
recognize his face you probably don't
recognize this I don't know the shirt
he's wearing or anything like that but
um he's famous his name became famous
the dunning-kruger effect has been a
joke on every TV talk show every sitcom
it's become a staple of I don't know
boardroom humor and it's definitely
become a major area of scientific
research in psychology the social
sciences so called behavioral ISM study
of human behavior and you know why did
he discover something
did he make some kind of scientific
breakthrough did he make a light bulb
that's 10% brighter or last 10% longer
something no no no no no he told the
crowd a story he told people a story
that they really wanted to hear it just
amused people the same way a mean
becomes famous in the Internet this idea
of the dunning-kruger effect just became
a worldwide phenomenon that's not evil
and it doesn't mean that David Dunning
here is a fraud or even that he's
intentionally trying to mislead you but
right now in the year 2019 all around
the world people starting with
peer-reviewed academic journals people
people like you and me on YouTube people
are having to deal with the revelation
that the whole dunning-kruger effect is
fake it's not based on valid empirical
data or research and the question is now
can we let go of can we show appropriate
detachment about this story that became
so much more popular than the scientific
facts it was supposed to describe so in
this video you're gonna hear again and
again that the famous dunning-kruger
effect is fake that it's not real and it
never was real that it's an idea that
people found appealing in the same way
that they might find an urban legend or
a modern myth appealing the problem is
this type of misperception becomes
dangerous precisely because people think
it is science now this isn't a
digression at all
I wish it was what you're looking at
here with Sir Isaac Newton
you probably associate the name Newton
with the word scientist gravity and
maybe a charming anecdote about an apple
falling from an apple tree that's the
story we tell ourselves what if I told
you that he was a politician what if I
told you that he was actually elected to
Parliament after running for office
twice what if I told you that he was a
special agent for the government what if
I told you he investigated and
prosecuted people for for counterfeiting
what if I told you that he wasn't merely
religious but was a sure religious
maniac who spent a large part of his
adult life creating and propounding
insane reinterpretations of biblical
passages a side of his life that today
nobody seems to be comfortable talking
about wow you might think the image of
this guy is a secular scientist is
really a gross simplification a gross
misrepresentation of a very eccentric
character somebody who had a diverse and
rich life experience isn't it a shame
that we can't be honest about all the
contradictions that are bundled up in
the real history of this character and
maybe some of the contradictions that
are bundled up with mmm the production
of new scientific knowledge new cultural
ideas instead of telling ourselves these
convenient little stories that really
conceal more than they reveal here's the
thing guys it's not that easy just think
about the period of time this guy lived
through look at his date of birth and
his date of death were not just trying
to distract ourselves from the fact that
this guy was a religious maniac who
worked in law enforcement for the
National mint have you ever once even
once in your life heard anyone quote or
comment on Isaac Newton's views on
slavery think about when he was born
think about when he died and guess what
we're really covering up here we're
creating the idea of Sir Isaac Newton as
a secular humanist progressive super
genius but we're covering up genocide
colonialism and slavery in the most
mind-blowing peer
of the atrocities the British Empire
you've got to force yourself to ignore
more than 90% of his extent writing and
more than 90% of what he really cared
about what he did with his own time
during his own life to believe this I
don't know
feeble of who Sir Isaac Newton was or
what he's supposed to represent for us
today
Isaac Newton really cared about politics
maybe we should - this is part of the
problem in thinking clearly about
science history and politics
especially when all three are
overlapping in the world's sexiest Venn
diagram take this dubious illustration
of the dunning-kruger effect
professional bikini model
Caroline's that one welcome back to
another video
all right before I started filming this
I checked my grade on an assignment I
just did and I thought I did really well
when I was turning it in I was actually
pretty excited because I thought I were
gonna get a good grade it turns out the
teacher didn't think so
cuz thank you me a 30% yeah that
happened
if we stop playing the tape here it
seems like a perfect example of
dunning-kruger the title of the original
hypothesis let's not forget is quote on
the skill and unaware of it but let's
listen to a perspective for just one
more moment I thought I did really well
when I was turning it in I was actually
pretty excited cuz I thought I were
gonna get a good grade it turns out the
teacher didn't think so cuz thank you me
a 30% yeah that happened every nice
schools not my thing um I do what I can
I try my best but then I proceeded to
spill water on my laptop so if we just
pause and think about this juxtaposition
for half a second it illustrates how
implausible the dunning-kruger
hypothesis really is now keep in mind
the word implausible doesn't mean false
it just means that would really need
evidence compelling evidence to prove
their case and as you probably already
know because you're watching this video
the math actually doesn't add up there
were three really
as possibilities here the first
possibility is that the story she's
telling is funny precisely because it's
rare or extraordinary it isn't every day
that driving instructors have a student
proclaim that they're really great at
driving a car and then minutes later
utterly fail the test if you know
someone who works as a driving
instructor they maybe have a few funny
stories like that from over the years
but the stories are funny because
they're unusual if it happened every day
if it were 70% of people doing this it
really wouldn't be funny anymore
it would just be part of human nature
we'd all be accustomed to right if that
was just a normal way most people think
and act oblivious to their own
incompetence all the time
there'd really be nothing funny about it
for every one story you hear about an
incompetent driver like this who's too
confident in their own ability and then
fails how many stories by contrast you
hear about people who voluntarily refuse
to drive at night you know people just
tell you oh no no my I said isn't good
enough I'm not a good neutral I don't
drive at night only drive during the day
how many people tell you that they would
never drive in the snow or that they
avoid driving on certain highways
because they know they know they're not
that good at driving they're aware of
their own limited confidence okay that's
what these peer-reviewed papers call
metacognition and it's not really very
rare at all the second possibility with
this story is that this woman is just
genuinely aware that she's not a very
good student as she says herself but
she's choosing to present this story in
a funny way if you just reverse the
order of the two parts of the story
she's told you suddenly there's nothing
amusing about it she's a bikini model
who knows that she's a poor student she
struggles to get a passing grade and
then fails that's really sad through a
sort of inversion of our expectations
an unexpected exposition it becomes
acute anecdote if that kind of
overconfidence were the default human
condition it wouldn't seem funny or
quirky or amusing if I tell you that
when I feel hungry I eat a piece of
bread that's not amusing
if I tell you that whenever I'm hungry i
angry shake my fist at a loaf of bread
and I curse the gods for this affliction
that's well sort of quirky and bizarre
some people might find that funny
because the point is here you don't
normally bling the loaf of bread for
your hunger that's an inversion of our
expectations right the third possibility
with this scenario the most implausible
and difficult to prove of all is that
this woman is actually incapable of
metacognition all right
metacognition is this fancy scientific
sounding word for being aware of one's
own thinking this is what the
dunning-kruger hypothesis is inviting
you to believe it's inviting you to
believe that this anecdote isn't a joke
but is an accurate description of the
way a huge percentage of people behave a
huge percentage of the time to really
believe in the dunning-kruger effect you
would have to believe that this woman is
lying to you when she says I realize
school is not my thing
that she's incapable of realizing it
that she can't be aware of her own
incompetence because the research says
so that sounds absurd right read it from
the original thesis quote their
incompetence robs them of the
metacognitive ability to realize it
close quote the burden of proof to
support that claim would be huge if you
think any significant percentage of
incompetent people cannot recognize
their own incompetence you should be
able to prove that empirically right
this is this is science not just
religion um I do what I can I try my
best
do we really live in a world where the
vast majority of incompetent drivers
think they're great at driving and the
vast majority of professional bikini
models are sincerely expecting an A+
when they receive a failing grade the
claim isn't just that this happens once
in a while the claim of the
dunning-kruger hypothesis is that your
incompetence
robs you of the ability
to even be aware of your own
incompetence it isn't just that you
might be guilty of wishful thinking once
in a while oh no no no the
dunning-kruger theory is that you
actually cannot assess yourself now why
do I use vague phrases in summarizing
dunning-kruger why do I say a huge
percentage of the population have this
problem instead of giving a specific
number why am I so vague because the
charts that they choose to show
dunning-kruger the other social sciences
who jumped on the bandwagon this the
charts that they choose to show are
vague look at this chart presented by
Dunning himself this makes it appear
that the vast majority of people think
they're way more competent than they
actually are where the blue line and the
red line intersect way over on the right
hand side there those are the people who
accurately evaluated their own ability
and then beyond that on the far right
end of the chart those are the people
who were more competent than they
thought they were but this makes it look
like the vast majority of humanity is to
the left of that intersection right
this chart intentionally does not tell
us what percentage of people have
significantly overestimated their
confidence instead it creates the
illusion that the vast majority of
people really thought of themselves as
much much more competent than they were
at least in this particular test the
dunning-kruger theory has created a
cottage industry in this type of pseudo
scientific presentation that audiences
embrace without question in the
empirical basis simply because they find
it amusing uplifting entertaining maybe
even a little flattering to their own
egos the theory invites us to imagine
ourselves as part of a small elite that
can laugh at the vast majority of the
population who are seemingly like
cartoon villains believing in their own
crazy schemes until the hero shows how
they can all go disastrously wrong so
this is where we begin our own little
fable of scientific discovery a lowly
professor of geology started evaluating
his students performance in 1992 this
involves surveys that ask some of the
same types of questions that the
dunning-kruger effect
interested in asking students how much
they know or how much they think they
know and then comparing that to how well
they could perform on exams their final
grade in the course
so on and so forth ultimately the
purpose of this research was try to help
students to learn effectively to help
professors teach effectively so on and
so forth
it wasn't about performing a script in
front of an audience at a TED talk it
wasn't about trying to start a meme
trying to get famous or I don't know to
produce content for sitcoms in its way
this really is a significant part of the
story it's also interesting that Edie
knew fur was not trying to challenge the
dunning-kruger model as late as 2011 he
was taking his own data and trying to
create the same types of charts showing
the same types of effects that were then
very fashionable throughout I don't know
psychology behavioral science and to
some extent within educational
evaluation as a special this one it was
then that he had his Eureka moment it
seems that any data he put through the
same process of analysis and displayed
with the same types of graphs which
showed the same so-called dunning-kruger
effect he could use random numbers and
get similar outcomes using real data
that he knew to be good and using fake
data that he knew to be bad produced
similar looking results to some extent
he knew that the method of displaying
the dunning-kruger effect in charts was
either massively exaggerating the effect
or conjuring it up like a mirage of
course the other problem was that when
you just displayed the real data in
other types of graphs the Mirage seemed
to disappear take a look real briefly
here I have an earlier video on the
topic but yeah we're talking about
twenty years of psychological research
and behavioral science based on a mirage
based on something that is not real on a
kind of made-up or misrepresented data
that even a geologist could refute
admittedly that geologist then spent
years working with mathematicians to pin
down the details and to get it all
through peer review
published but the fundamental problem
did not require an expert to detect
neither an expert in psychology nor an
expert in human behavior nor even an
expert in math and guess what I already
have a video explaining that I already
have a video that talks you through step
by step what you're gonna find in the
first two major peer-reviewed papers
that break this story wide open prove it
to you show you the evidence step by
step guess what right now 2019 is the
year when people finally start to figure
it out this has been proven this is not
a matter of opinion ultimately this
comes down to hard numbers that nobody
can just dismiss or balk at there are at
least two more major peer-reviewed
papers coming up this year 2019 dealing
with the fact that the dunning-kruger
effect is not real the depressing
question I have to ask you and that we
all have to ask ourselves is who is
going to care are people really going to
be open to dealing with this reality
learning the lessons about the condition
shaping the production of knowledge in
the 21st century are we even going to
take this as some kind of grave warning
about how the peer-review process itself
works or do people just want to
construct another feeble that makes them
feel good about themselves like the
feeble of Isaac Newton sitting under an
apple tree fable that's not completely
false but that really conceals much more
than it reveals thanks for your time
support this channel on patreon or don't
the facts don't lie but trust me a lot
of people are making money by lying
about the facts